---
layout:     post
title:      "Sanguine Snow"
subtitle:   "Friends and Comrades"
date:       2015-11-16 19:00:00
author:     "Hileah Bennet"
header-img: "img/post-bg-01.jpg"
---

<p>Day seventeen, late evening. The last two weeks have taken us through the Fjord, past Amberpine, and onward to Dragonblight. We're now encamped at Wintergarde Keep, using the upper floor of the tavern as makeshift infirmary and base of operations. A permanently manned base even now, it provides a modicum of respite from the harsh elements: Temperature this far north doesn't stray above freezing point, and the days are short. Bare wood beams, bunkbeds, grey standard-issue blankets and little to punctuate the monotony besides brandy and hushed conversation.
</p>

<p>For the last three days this dormitory has been home to the Steel Gauntlet, a specialised unit under the auspices of Alliance High Command, but for now it’s empty. Everyone is out on operations, leaving behind them the debris of spare armour, half emptied coffee cups, strewn clothes on bunks. I ought to be with them, as medic and chaplain, but now it’s my turn to wait. Partial full-thickness burns to hands and forearms, tearing laceration to right side of torso. I’m recovering well, but the consensus was that I’d slow the others down, especially trudging through waist-deep snowdrifts and packed ice. The majority of military life is waiting, not fighting, but waiting alone for the others is a particular anxiety. The soldier in me would rather be out there with them, though I’m not the most useful of combatants, to say the least.
</p>

<p>Two hours into what should have been a routine combat operation… They really should have returned by now, contingencies notwithstanding. Reaching out for my clipboard, I look to my roster, then my casualty list and objectives. Yellow parchment, bearing the seal of Stormwind Keep. Helps to remind oneself why exactly we’re in the frozen wastes to start with: The Steel Gauntlet are in Northrend for the purposes of following up a lead, on behalf of High Command, as ever. Rumours of some new threat, and traces of Nerubian rune-magic are deemed to merit investigation, and termination if necessary.
</p>

<p>The call eventually filters around the stationed soldiers of the Seventh – “Unit incoming, and they've got wounded.” They’re referring to my unit, it so happens, though our hosts seem not to have to resources to help out. Everyone is focused on their own tasks. Climbing from my bed (I’m not recovered enough for stairs), I can at least look to the window. One single horse riding up, rider and passenger, none of the others yet. They’ve broken ranks? When a unit doesn’t return from combat operations as a group, it’s generally time to prepare for casualties. Besides, the need for haste becomes apparent as the first of the wounded is brought upstairs to the dormitory. It’s erstwhile Ranger-Captain Scarlett Shelby. There’s no need to ask what happened to her, the evidence is protruding from her lower stomach: Crossbow bolt. She’s haemorrhaging all over the stony faced, silver-haired soldier who carries her. I order the gangly sellsword laid onto the nearest bed, and unwrap the bandages around my hands. Time to work, burns or no. She’s conscious, still. For the medic, consciousness of course denotes life and vitality, but it’s also a distraction. The screams of the wounded, their twitching and contracting of muscles serve to make the healing process more difficult. Triage first: Gunshot, right thigh, entry anterior medial, and then the bolt in her gut. She’s been left in the snow too long besides. Someone’s already tried with the ballistic trauma at her leg, but no one tried to pull the bolt from her. Cursory prodding around reveals it to be serrated, to rip it free is going to tear at her insides.
</p>

<p>Approaching noises from outside and downstairs, more injured are carried up to what has quickly become an operating theatre, the space that was so quiet with pregnant expectation but a quarter-hour ago is now a caught in a storm of activity and discharging wounds. I barely have time for the most cursory examination to the others, but some barely-walking wounded are immediately apparent: Kate Piper, a frontline soldier, has a laceration to her shoulder deep enough to expose fractured bone. Her own blood seeps between the floorboards where she sits. Liam Eichron, stabbing puncture wounds showing through light armour, a couple of deep slices over his chest. Someone was smart enough in the field to pack his wounds with snow, coagulating the outflowing blood. He’s on his feet, for now. Markel Tanner, my assistant medic, unconscious and laid out on one of the bunks besides me. Still more wounded are brought upstairs. Randal Harken, knight-armsman, another bolt to his side, but not apparently so grievous, and the veteran paladin Sir Oswig is doing what he can for it. Shelby remains top of the critical list.
</p>

<p>The scream that accompanied the removal of the barbed quarrel from her insides, would have been heard from the other side of this encampment. Everyone is inured to screams, these days. It means she’s not dead at least, though she is a mess. Disembowelment might be too strong a term, but it’s not that far off. I use the retractor to open the wound up enough to get a look inside; gastrointestinal perforation, her stomach ruptured. Check vital signs again, pulse slowing, her consciousness fades, as her body retracts further into shock trauma. Calling her name yields no response. I try to keep working, and not panic.
</p>

<p>
“Hileah?” I hear vaguely, behind me somewhere. I recognise the well-spoken voice, Francesca Rynslay, Mage-Captain, though I don’t have time to turn around, my hands still buried deep in Shelby’s abdomen, trying to find and seal the puncture points and close her up before she checks out on us entirely.
</p>

<p>“Leah- I've got to do something about Liam. He needs stitching. I know I'm not terribly good at it, but-.” “How deep is the wound, Frankie?” “Slices rather than stabs, but there are a few of them. He's bleeding.” The trick is to accumulate information as quickly as possible. Not her fault. I ought to teach her how to succinctly describe wounds, sometime. A slightly terse reply: “Yes, yes. How deep, compared to your thumb?” “Just... Nearly half my thumbnail.” I hazard a guess, no time to inspect for myself: “Vertical mattress sutures, like I showed you back in Stonetalon.”
</p>

<p>Horns blow outside, disturbing the anxious quiet of those in the temporary operating theatre. Those who are not crying out in pain, at least. Last up the stairs comes the slight but charismatic Emberley James, Commander of the Gauntlet, to whose service I am sworn. She is looking drained and ashen. Whatever happened out there tonight, it must have been fraught even for those experienced in battle. She slumps into a chair, and I continue my work. Tiny blood vessels are cauterized with the aid of Light, and I’m finally able to get enough purchase to seal up the raking tears to Scarlett’s intestine and stomach. For now this will have to do, I can’t really expose her to greater trauma, though I know I’ll be opening her up again in the coming days. Especially if I can’t get her blood pressure within range. I close the wound with prayers and Light alone, no time for sutures, and roll her onto her side. Shelby chokes and coughs limply, and I wipe bloody hands on my robes, before reaching fingers into her mouth to clear it of vomit. Her vital signs are checked again. Stable but critical. Done, or as done as can be for now, bar one last job.
</p>

<p>Reaching for hose, vacuum flask, and needle, I wrap a tourniquet around my bicep before tapping up a vein on my own inner-elbow and plunging the hypodermic. Blood pumps through needle into the hose, running down and filling the bottle slowly with blood. Another volunteer would be better, but Shelby and I match blood types. I finally take pause, unable to work and provide transfusion blood simultaneously. Long minutes pass where all I’m able to do is dispense advice and write notes for the prognosis records. “Yes, you’ll need a bolster in a wound that wide”, “No, no food, nil-by-mouth, have her on a drip overnight.” The casualty-list is by now more or less indistinguishable from the roster itself.
</p>

<p>Throughout all this, the objectives and reasons for being here are as irrelevant to me as they are to the others. The only objective is mere mutual survival. The air takes on the characteristic red mist of blood, the taste of iron on the air, and I can hear Francesca behind me, making rounds, doing what she can to keep everyone alive in quiet determination. Some of the unharmed or less-harmed are already in their cups, downing liquor in a bid to escape the horror witnessed, or just because their wait begins afresh. War wounds the psyche as much the body corporeal, though for most here it has become simply another day to get through, nothing more or less.
</p>

<p>Blood bottle full, I hand the transfusion off to an assistant, who can supplement Shelby’s lost blood for my own, and transition her to post-op recovery. I rise to move over to Kate. She’s made a mess of herself and the floorboards around her, and I tell her so. Black humour has long since replaced wide-eyed sympathy, at least when treating a soldier as seasoned as her. I can see right into her mangled arm: Stage four full-thickness laceration, and comminuted fracture to humerus. Bicep sliced right through to reveal shattered bone, in other words. Her blood has started to clot, leaving thin, watery serosanguineous discharge to trickle down her elbow. As I tie on my surgical mask and prepare to operate once more, I try to remind myself what exactly we’re – no, that I’m doing here. For King and Country? Not so much. For Friends and Comrades, then.
</p>